Tales of Birbal
Akbar, the third Mogul emperor, had a number of wise officials at his court.
Among them was a man whose name was Raja Birbal.
He was famous for his quick wit and was very wise with his words.
Thus, the emperor always liked to have Birbal near him.
To test his officials’ wisdom, Akbar often asked them strange questions.
One day, he came up with an interesting question.
Akbar: Someone pulled a hair from my head today. What should I do to him?
Official 1: He should be punished, of course.
Official 2: Yes, punish him!
Akbar turned to Birbal.
Akbar: What would you do if you were in my place, Birbal?
Birbal: If I were you, I would give him sweets.
Official 3: What’s he talking about?
Official 4: Birbal’s crazy!
Akbar: What made you say so?
Birbal: The person who pulled your hair must be your grandson. No one else could do such a thing.
Akbar: You are indeed correct, Birbal. I’m so glad to have someone as wise as you near me.
One day, the king of Persia sent an official with a strange favor.
Persian Official: I hear you have a lot of wise men in your country.
I’ve been asked by my king to bring him a potful of wisdom.
Official 5: That makes no sense! How can we put wisdom in a pot?
Akbar: Can you bring him a potful of wisdom, Birbal?
Birbal: It won’t be a problem. Could you please wait a few weeks?
Persian Official: Of course! Take as much time as you need.
A few weeks later, Birbal came back with two pots whose necks were really narrow.
He offered one to the Persian official.
Birbal: You can take this pot of wisdom to your king.
Please ask him to return the pot to us after he takes the wisdom out of it.
Birbal: The pot is very precious, so please be careful not to break it. We only have two pots of wisdom.
The Persian official looked inside the pot and became speechless. He thanked Birbal and left for his country.
Persian Official: It would be great if there were a man as wise as Birbal in our country.
After the Persian official left, Akbar asked Birbal what was inside the pot.
Birbal: Here is the other pot. You can see for yourself.
Akbar looked inside the other pot and found a pumpkin just as big as the pot.
Akbar: I see! The pumpkin can’t be taken out without breaking the pot. How did you do it?
Birbal: I put the pots over pumpkin flowers and waited until the pumpkins grew as big as the pots.
Akbar: Hahaha! This certainly is a potful of wisdom!